‘Musharakah’ is a word of Arabic origin which literally means
sharing. In the context of business and trade it means a joint
enterprise in which all the partners share the profit or loss of the
joint venture. It is an ideal alternative for the interest-based
financing with far reaching effects on both production and
distribution. In the modern capitalist economy, interest is the sole
instrument indiscriminately used in financing of every type. Since
Islam has prohibited interest, this instrument cannot be used for
providing funds of any kind. Therefore, musharakah can play a vital
role in an economy based on Islamic principles.
‘Interest’ predetermines a fixed rate of return on a loan
advanced by the financier irrespective of the profit earned or loss
suffered by the debtor, while musharakah does not envisage a fixed
rate of return. Rather, the return in musharakah is based on the
actual profit earned by the joint venture. The financier in an
interest-bearing loan cannot suffer loss while the financier in
musharakah can suffer loss, if the joint venture fails to produce
fruits. Islam has termed interest as an unjust instrument of
financing because it results in injustice either to the creditor or to
the debtor. If the debtor suffers a loss, it is unjust on the part of the
creditor to claim a fixed rate of return; and if the debtor earns a very
high rate of profit, it is injustice to the creditor to give him only a
small proportion of the profit leaving the rest for the debtor.
In the modern economic system, it is the banks which advance
depositors’ money as loans to industrialists and traders. If
industrialists having only ten million of their own, acquire 90
million from the banks and embark on a huge profitable project, it
means that 90% of the project has been created by the money of the
depositors while only 10% has been created by their own capital. If
this huge project brings enormous profits, only a small proportion
i.e. 14 or 15% will go to the depositors through the bank, while all
the rest will be gained by the industrialists whose real contribution
to the project is not more than 10%. Even this small proportion of
14 or 15% is taken back by the industrialists, because this
proportion is included by them in the cost of their production. The
net result is that all the profit of the enterprise is earned by the
persons whose own capital does not exceed 10% of the total
investment, while the people owning 90% of the investment get no
more than the fixed rate of interest which is often repaid by them
through the increased prices of the products. On the contrary, if in
an extreme situation, the industrialists go insolvent, their own loss is
no more than 10%, while the rest of 90% is totally borne by the
bank, and in some cases, by the depositors. In this way, the rate of
interest is the main cause for imbalances in the system of
distribution, which has a constant tendency in favor of the rich and
against the interests of the poor.
Conversely, Islam has a clear cut principle for the financier.
According to Islamic principles, a financier must determine whether
he is advancing a loan to assist the debtor on humanitarian grounds
or he desires to share his profits. If he wants to assist the debtor, he
should resist from claiming any excess on the principal of his loan,
because his aim is to assist him. However, if he wants to have a
share in the profits of his debtor, it is necessary that he should also
share him in his losses. Thus the returns of the financier in
musharakah have been tied up with the actual profits accrued
through the enterprise. The greater the profits of the enterprise, the
higher the rate of return to the financier. If the enterprise earns
enormous profits, all of it cannot be secured by the industrialist
exclusively, but they will be shared by the common people as
depositors in the bank. In this way, musharakah has a tendency to
favor the common people rather than the rich only.
This is the basic philosophy which explains why Islam has
suggested musharakah as an alternative to the interest based
financing. No doubt, musharakah embodies a number of practical
problems in its full implementation as a universal mode of
financing. It is sometimes presumed that musharakah is an old
instrument which cannot keep pace with the ever-advancing need
for speedy transactions. However, this presumption is due to the
lack of proper knowledge concerning the principles of musharakah.
In fact, Islam has not prescribed a specific form or procedure for
musharakah. Rather, it has set some broad principles which can
accommodate numerous forms and procedures. A new form or
procedure in musharakah cannot be rejected merely because it has
no precedent in the past. In fact, every new form can be acceptable
to the Shari‘ah in so far as it does not violate any basic principle laid
down by the Holy Qur’an, the Sunnah or the consensus of the
Muslim jurists. Therefore, it is not necessary that musharakah be
implemented only in its traditional old form.
The present chapter contains a discussion of the basic principles
of musharakah and the way in which it can be implemented in the
context of modern business and trade. This discussion is aimed at
introducing musharakah as a modern mode of financing without
violating its basic principles in any way. Musharakah has been
introduced with reference to the books of Islamic jurisprudence,
and basic problems which may be faced in implementing it in a
modern situation. It is hoped that this brief discussion will open
new horizons for the thinking of Muslim jurists and economists and
may help implementing a true Islamic economy.
The Concept of Musharakah
‘Musharakah’ is a term frequently referred to in the context of
Islamic modes of financing. The connotation of this term is a little
limited than the term “shirkah” more commonly used in the Islamic
jurisprudence. For the purpose of clarity in the basic concepts, it
will be pertinent at the outset to explain the meaning of each term,
as distinguished from the other.
“Shirkah” means “sharing” and in the terminology of Islamic
Fiqh, it has been divided into two kinds:
(1) Shirkat-ul-Milk: It means joint ownership of two or more
persons in a particular property. This kind of “shirkah” may come
into existence in two different ways: Sometimes it comes into
operation at the option of the parties. For example, if two or more
persons purchase an equipment, it will be owned jointly by both of
them and the relationship between them with regard to that
property is called “shirkat-ul-milk.” Here this relationship has come
into existence at their own option, as they themselves elected to
purchase the equipment jointly.
But there are cases where this kind of “shirkah” comes to
operate automatically without any action taken by the parties. For
example, after the death of a person, all his heirs inherit his property
which comes into their joint ownership as an automatic
consequence of the death of that person.
(2) Shirkat-ul-‘Aqd: This is the second type of Shirkah which
means “a partnership effected by a mutual contract”. For the
purpose of brevity it may also be translated as “joint commercial
enterprise.”
Shirkat-ul-’aqd is further divided into three kinds:
(i) Shirkat-ul-Amwal where all the partners invest some capital
into a commercial enterprise.
(ii) Shirkat-ul-A’mal where all the partners jointly undertake to
render some services for their customers, and the fee charged from
them is distributed among them according to an agreed ratio. For
example, if two persons agree to undertake tailoring services for
their customers on the condition that the wages so earned will go to
a joint pool which shall be distributed between them irrespective of
the size of work each partner has actually done, this partnership will
be a shirkat-ul-a’mal which is also called Shirkat-ut-taqabbul or
Shirkat-us-sana’i’ or Shirkat-ul-abdan.
(iii) The third kind of Shirkat-ul-’aqd is Shirkat-ul-wujooh.
Here the partners have no investment at all. All they do is that they
purchase the commodities on a deferred price and sell them at spot.
The profit so earned is distributed between them at an agreed ratio.
All these modes of “Sharing” or partnership are termed as
“shirkah” in the terminology of Islamic Fiqh, while the term
“musharakah” is not found in the books of Fiqh. This term (i.e.
musharakah) has been introduced recently by those who have
written on the subject of Islamic modes of financing and it is
normally restricted to a particular type of “Shirkah”, that is, the
Shirkat-ul-amwal, where two or more persons invest some of their
capital in a joint commercial venture. However, sometimes it
includes Shirkat-ul-a’mal also where partnership takes place in the
business of services.
It is evident from this discussion that the term “Shirkah” has a
much wider sense than the term “musharakah” as is being used
today. The latter is limited to the “Shirkat-ul-amwal” only, while
the former includes all types of joint ownership and those of
partnership. Table 1 will show the different kinds of “Shirkah” and
the two kinds which are called “musharakah” in the modern
terminology.
Since “musharakah” is more relevant for the purpose of our
discussion, and it is almost analogous to “Shirkat-ul-amwal”, we
shall now dwell upon it, explaining at the first instance, the
traditional concept of this type of Shirkah, then giving a brief
account of its application to the concept of financing in the modern
context.
The Basic Rules of Musharakah
1. Musharakah or Shirkat-ul-amwal is a relationship established by
the parties through a mutual contract. Therefore, it goes without
saying that all the necessary ingredients of a valid contract must be
present here also. For example, the parties should be capable of
entering into a contract; the contract must take place with free
consent of the parties without any duress, fraud or
misrepresentation, etc., etc.
But there are certain ingredients which are peculiar to the
contract of “musharakah”. They are summarized here:
2. The proportion of profit to be distributed between the partners
must be agreed upon at the time of effecting the contract. If no such
proportion has been determined, the contract is not valid in
Shari‘ah.
3. The ratio of profit for each partner must be determined in
proportion to the actual profit accrued to the business, and not in
proportion to the capital invested by him. It is not allowed to fix a
lump sum amount for any one of the partners, or any rate of profit
tied up with his investment.
Therefore, if A and B enter into a partnership and it is agreed
between them that A shall be given Rs 10,000/- per month as his
share in the profit, and the rest will go to B, the partnership is
invalid. Similarly, if it is agreed between them that A will get 15%
of his investment, the contract is not valid. The correct basis for
distribution would be an agreed percentage of the actual profit
accrued to the business.
If a lump sum amount or a certain percentage of the investment
has been agreed for any one of the partners, it must be expressly
mentioned in the agreement that it will be subject to the final
settlement at the end of the term, meaning thereby that any amount
so drawn by any partner shall be treated as ‘on account payment’
and will be adjusted to the actual profit he may deserve at the end of
the term. But if no profit is actually earned or is less than
anticipated, the amount drawn by the partner shall have to be
returned.
4. Is it necessary that the ratio of profit of each partner conforms to
the ratio of capital invested by him? There is a difference of opinion
among the Muslim jurists about this question.
In the view of Imam Malik and Imam Shafi’i, it is necessary for
the validity of musharakah that each partner gets the profit exactly
in the proportion of his investment. Therefore, if A has invested
40% of the total capital, he must get 40% of the profit. Any
agreement to the contrary which makes him entitled to get more or
less than 40% will render the musharakah invalid in Shari‘ah.
On the contrary, the view of Imam Ahmad is that the ratio of
profit may differ from the ratio of investment if it is agreed between
the partners with their free consent. Therefore, it is permissible that
a partner with 40% of investment gets 60% or 70% of the profit,
while the other partner with 60% of investment gets only 40% or
30%.
